---
title: An Analysis of Monty Python
author: Natalie Brianne
authorURL: https://twitter.com/NatalieBriBooks
date: 2021-03-01T18:30:00.000Z
---
*Monty Python’s Flying Circus* was a sketch comedy series that was created in Great Britain by the comedy group Monty Python. The sketches consist of absurd situations that are humorous simply because of the way they subvert expectations. Part of this humor derives from how they use different types of meaning to turn benign interactions into humorous situations. For the purposes of this paper, I will be analyzing several of Python’s more well-known sketches to see how the Pythons use the linguistic meaning derivations of schemata and scripts, lexical relationships and denotation to construct absurd situations for their sketches. 

The first sketch for analysis is “The Cheese Shop.” The sketch is set in just that—a cheese shop. A man walks into the shop to “negotiate the vending of some cheesy comestibles” (Cleese).  In this case, the Pythons subvert a well-known script or schemata in order to achieve a humorous outcome. The assumption for this script is that a shop that advertises itself as selling cheese would have some in stock. However, as the sketch progresses it becomes increasingly clear that the shop keeper doesn’t have any cheese whatsoever. No matter how many cheeses the customer names off, or how ridiculous they sound, the shop is suspiciously free of any form of cultured curd. In this way the script that the audience is anticipating is dislodged. It is further upended with a traditional Monty Python ending; instead of the expected punchline, the sketch abruptly ends with the customer shooting the shopkeeper and sporting a stilton hat like the lead in a western film. 

Another well-known sketch is “The Dead Parrot Sketch.” This one is set within a pet shop. A disgruntled customer enters the shop, cage in hand, intending to make a complaint. As the title of the sketch suggests, the parrot in question is dead. This sketch plays with linguistic derivations of meaning in several ways. Similarly to “The Cheese Shop,” one would expect based on previous scripts and schemata that when you enter a pet shop to purchase a pet, the animal will be alive. Within the first few lines, we find out that the customer had bought the parrot thirty minutes previous, and that unbeknownst to the owner it was already dead. This subverts the script and is humorous. However, the sketch takes it one step further and uses lexical relationships as the argument progresses. The shopkeeper asserts that the parrot is still alive, but is “merely resting” (Palin). The humor, in this case, is derived from the fact that the adjectives “dead” and “alive” are non-gradable antonyms. While other adjective pairings such as good and bad have a scale (in that case you can have a grey area of mediocrity), in matters of life and death you can’t have a middle ground. The parrot is either alive or dead.

As the sketch continues, it is evident to all—shopkeeper, audience, and customer—that the parrot is deceased. The shopkeeper’s continuing excuses for why the parrot isn’t moving are fruitless. And so we move onto a different lexical relationship: synonymy. In his frustration, the customer lets off a rant, describing the parrot’s current state with as many synonyms and euphemisms as possible. For instance, the parrot is “no more! He has ceased to be! He has expired and gone to meet his maker….if you hadn’t nailed him to the perch he’d be pushing up the daisies” (Palin). This list of synonyms and euphemisms is hilarious because of the sheer quantity of them and because of their direct opposition to the shopkeeper’s assertion that the parrot is alive. Regardless of what the shopkeeper says, it is “an ex-parrot” (Palin). 

In “The Architect Sketch,” the denotation of what an apartment building is becomes the cause for an argument between an architect and his clients, and by consequence becomes an absurdly funny situation. The architect presents his building and at first, nothing is amiss. However, very quickly, the clients realize that there was a miscommunication. When an architect is hired, clear expectations for the building are put in place. You would not expect an architect to build a fire station when an elementary school has been ordered. So, when the architect begins describing conveyor belts, rotating knives, and other objects of slaughter commonly found in abattoirs, the clients are understandably confused. This issue stems from denotative features being ignored. While both are buildings and both house things, one houses people and the other houses animals and later the meat produced from them. While both may have halls, floors, ceilings, and walls, you wouldn’t want to rent out a slaughterhouse to people for obvious reasons. This misuse of features creates a comical situation, wherein the design is declined and the architect storms off after an angry rant about creativity being squandered. 

These are only a few examples of how *Monty Python’s Flying Circus* used derivations of meaning in their comedy sketches. A big factor in comedy is finding expectations and flipping them on their head. Each of the sketches has a simple premise, and with only a few changes the expectations are completely subverted. By adjusting the meanings slightly by using scripts and schemata, lexical relationships, and denotative features, the Pythons orchestrated comedic sketches focused around commonplace situations placed in absurdity.